feat(node_monitoring): provide node monitoring guide (#33)
galacticcouncil/HydraDX-docs: docs/node_monitoring.md

### Install Node Exporter

Download the latest release.

```shell script
$ wget https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/releases/download/v1.1.2/node_exporter-1.1.2.linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

Unpack the archive you just downloaded. This will create a folder called `node_exporter-1.1.2.linux-amd64`.

```shell script
$ tar xvf node_exporter-1.1.2.linux-amd64.tar.gz
```

Next we copy the binary into our local application directory and assign it to our monitoring user.

```shell script
# copy binary
$ cp node_exporter-1.1.2.linux-amd64/node_exporter /usr/local/bin

# set ownership
$ sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/node_exporter
```

We can now do some cleanup and remove the downloaded and unpacked package.

```shell script
$ rm -rf node_exporter*
```

### Create a Systemd Service

Similar to prometheus we want Node Exporter to run as a service too.  
Create a systemd service with your editor of choice.

```shell script
$ sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/node_exporter.service
```

And paste the following configuration into it.

```
[Unit]
Description=Node Exporter
Wants=network-online.target
After=network-online.target

[Service]

> User=node_exporter

Reviewer: should be `prometheus` 🙏

---
id: node_monitoring
title: Node Monitoring
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl'; 

> In this chapter we will walk you through setting up a local monitoring for your validator node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter we will walk you through the setup of local monitoring for your validator node.
```

## Prerequisites

You must have your [validator node](/node_setup) up and running.  
This guide was tested on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS release.

## Prometheus Setup

In the first step we will set up the Prometheus server.

### User and Directories

> We create a user just for the monitoring purpose which has no home directory and can't be used to log in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We create a user just for monitoring purposes which has no home directory and can't be used to log in.
```

```shell script
$ sudo useradd --no-create-home --shell /usr/sbin/nologin prometheus
```

> Then we create directories for the executable and configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we create directories for the executable and the configuration file.
```

```shell script
$ sudo mkdir /etc/prometheus
$ sudo mkdir /var/lib/prometheus
```

Change ownership of the directories to restrict them to our new monitoring user.

```shell script
$ sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus
$ sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus
```

### Install Prometheus

Check latest version number of Prometheus at the [GitHub release page](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/).  
At the time of writing it is v2.25.2. Insert the latest release version in the following commands.

```shell script
# download prometheus
$ wget https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.25.2/prometheus-2.25.2.linux-amd64.tar.gz

# unpack the binaries
$ tar xfz prometheus-*.tar.gz

# enter the unpacked directory
$ cd prometheus-2.25.2.linux-amd64
```

Now copy over the binaries into the local folder.

```shell script
$ sudo cp ./prometheus /usr/local/bin/
$ sudo cp ./promtool /usr/local/bin/
```

We now need to assign those binaries to our freshly created user.

```shell script
$ sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/prometheus
$ sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/promtool
```

> Next up we'll copy over the web interface and configuration presets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next up we'll copy the web interface and the configuration presets.
```

```shell script
$ sudo cp -r ./consoles /etc/prometheus
$ sudo cp -r ./console_libraries /etc/prometheus
```

You may have guessed it already but we're also changing the ownership of those directories.

```shell script
$ sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/consoles
$ sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/console_libraries
```

> We now got everything we need from the downloaded package so we will go one step back and do some cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now have everything we need from the downloaded package so we will go one step back and do some cleanup.
```

```shell script
$ cd .. && rm -rf prometheus*
```

Let's create a `YAML` configuration file for Prometheus with the editor of your choice (nano / vim / pico).

```shell script
$ sudo nano /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

Our config is divided in three sections:

* `global`: sets the default values for `scrape_interval` and the rule-execution interval with `evaluation_interval`
* `rule_files`: specify rule-files the Prometheus server should load
* `scrape_configs`: this is where you set the monitoring-resources

We will keep it very basic and end up with something like this:

```yaml
global:
  scrape_interval: 15s
  evaluation_interval: 15s

rule_files:
  # - "weHaveNo.rules"

scrape_configs:
  - job_name: "prometheus"
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:9090"]
  - job_name: "substrate_node"
    scrape_interval: 5s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:9615"]
```

> The first scrape job exports data of Prometheus itself, the second one carries the HydraDX node metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first scrape job exports data of Prometheus itself, the second one exports the HydraDX node metrics.
```

> We adjusted the `scrape_interval` of both jobs to get a more detailed statistic. This overrides the global values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We adjusted the `scrape_interval` of both jobs to get more detailed statistics. This overrides the global values.
```

The `target` in `static_configs` sets where the exporters run, we stick to the default ports here.

After saving the configuration we will - once again - change the ownership.

```shell script
$ sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

### Starting Prometheus

To have Prometheus starting automatically and running in the background we'll use `systemd`.
Create a new config (again with the editor of your choice):

````shell script
$ sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service
````

Paste the following configuration and save the file.

```
[Unit]
  Description=Prometheus Monitoring
  Wants=network-online.target
  After=network-online.target

[Service]
  User=prometheus
  Group=prometheus
  Type=simple
  ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
  --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
  --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ \
  --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
  --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries
  ExecReload=/bin/kill -HUP $MAINPID

[Install]
  WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

> We will do three steps in one now but here's what it does:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next we will perform the following three steps:
```

`systemctl deamon-reload` loads new configurations and updates existing 
`systemctl enable` activates our new service
`systemctl start` triggers the execution of the service

> Please perform all three actions in one step now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can perform the steps above in one command by executing:
```

### Install Grafana

Please check what's the latest Grafana Version [with this link](https://grafana.com/grafana/download?platform=linux).  
You can either change the version number in the following commands or copy the install commands directly from the link.  
At the time of writing the latest version was `7.5.1`.

```shell script
$ sudo apt-get install -y adduser libfontconfig1
$ wget https://dl.grafana.com/oss/release/grafana_7.5.1_amd64.deb
$ sudo dpkg -i grafana_7.5.1_amd64.deb
```

The package comes with a builtin `systemd`-service which we will configure and start just like the Prometheus service.

```shell script
$ sudo systemctl daemon-reload && sudo systemctl enable grafana-server && sudo systemctl start grafana-server
```

### Accessing the Web Interface

We'll be able to open the Grafana web interface at http://localhost:3000/.  
The default login Grafana is:  
User: `admin`  
Password: `admin`  

<div style={{textAlign: 'center'}}>
  <img src={useBaseUrl('/node-monitoring/grafana-home.png')} />
</div>

### Configuring the Datasource

Please click the settings gear in the menu and select datasources.  

> In the next window you click "Add Datasource" and celect "Prometheus".  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the next window you click "Add Datasource" and select "Prometheus".  
```
